# AI translation for fulltext

This is an example of a bookmarklet which can be added in Firefox or other web browsers
and which triggers a translation of the fulltext display (ORC results) in Kitodo.Presention.

Most of the code was generated by the LLM qwen3-coder.

## Server-side installation

The translation process uses the Ollama API, so a running Ollama instance with API access is required.

Copy the files `translate.js` and `ollama-proxy.php` to a web server which supports PHP.
Replace `BASE_URL` in `translate.js` by the URL where you have installed the server side of the code.
Replace `localhost` in `ollama-proxy.php` by the URL of your Ollama service if it is installed on a different server.
Optionally replace the model and the prompt in `ollama-proxy.php` if you want a different translation or a summary, perhaps using a different model, too.

Make sure that `translate.js` is allowed to load `ollama-proxy.php`. Usually this will require CORS settings for your web server.

## Client-side installation

Add a bookmark with this code in the URL field in your web browser:
```
javascript:(function(){const d=document.getElementById('tx-dlf-fulltextselection');if(!d)return;d.style.cursor='pointer';d.addEventListener('click',e=>{if(e.target!==d&&!d.contains(e.target))return;const s=document.createElement('script');s.src='BASE_URL/translation.js?r='+Math.random();s.async=0;document.body.appendChild(s);});})();
```

Replace `BASE_URL` by the URL where you have installed the server side of the code.

Then show any digitized publication with fulltext in Kitodo (or the DFG Viewer), click on your new bookmarklet and click into the fulltext display.
This will trigger the translation process. It takes some time and will open a popup window with the translated text as soon as it is finished.
